Document backup and restore (#4793)
treeverse/lakeFS: docs/howto/garbage-collection.md

GC was created to hard-delete objects from your underlying objects store according to your retention rules. However, when you start
using the feature you may want to first gain confidence in the decisions GC makes. The GC backup and restore utility helps you do that. 

**Use-cases:**
* Backup: copy expired objects from your repository's storage namespace to an external location before running GC in [sweep only mode](#sweep-only-mode).  
* Restore: copy objects that were hard-deleted by GC from an external location you used for saving your backup into your repository's storage namespace.

### Using rclone

Follow [rclone documentation](https://rclone.org/docs/) to configure remote access to the underlying storage used by lakeFS.

> Replace `LAKEFS_STORAGE_NAMESPACE` with remote:bucket/path points to the lakeFS repository storage namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replace `LAKEFS_STORAGE_NAMESPACE` with remote:bucket/path which points to the lakeFS repository storage namespace.
```

The `BACKUP_STORAGE_LOCATION` attribute points to a location for backing up the objects that will be deleted.

#### Backup command

   ```shell

>    rclone --include "*.txt" cat "<LAKEFS_STORAGE_NAMESPACE>/_lakefs/retention/gc/addresses.text/mark_id=<MARK_ID>/" | \

Reviewer: This path is true for committed GC but it's not correct for uncommitted.
Same thing for the restore command

Reviewer: NM, I see it's in a different section

     rclone -P --no-traverse --files-from - copy <LAKEFS_STORAGE_NAMESPACE> <BACKUP_STORAGE_LOCATION>
   ```

#### Restore command

   ```shell
   rclone --include "*.txt" cat "<LAKEFS_STORAGE_NAMESPACE>/_lakefs/retention/gc/addresses.text/mark_id=<MARK_ID>/" | \
     rclone -P --no-traverse --files-from - copy <BACKUP_STORAGE_LOCATION> <LAKEFS_STORAGE_NAMESPACE>
   ```

### Using DistCp

This utility is a Spark application that uses [DistCp](https://hadoop.apache.org/docs/current/hadoop-distcp/DistCp.html) under the hood to copy objects marked by GC as expired from one location to another. 

**Notes**
* GC backup and restore is available from version 0.5.2 of lakeFS Spark client.
* It is compatible with Hadoop API versions 3.1.3 and higher.
* Note that the utility is not fast due to DistCp performance limitations. You may prefer to backup your whole storage namespace with [AzCopy](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/storage/common/storage-use-azcopy-v10) / [aws cp](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/reference/s3/cp.html) / [rclone](https://rclone.org/).

> * GC Backup & Restore job is [broken](https://github.com/treeverse/lakeFS/issues/4775) due to recent changes to the storage namespace structure. We're working to fix it. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* GC Backup & Restore job using DistCp is [broken](https://github.com/treeverse/lakeFS/issues/4775) due to recent changes to the storage namespace structure. We're working to fix it. 
```

GC was created to hard-delete objects from your underlying objects store according to your retention rules. However, when you start
using the feature you may want to first gain confidence in the decisions GC makes. The GC backup and restore utility helps you do that. 

**Use-cases:**
* Backup: copy expired objects from your repository's storage namespace to an external location before running GC in [sweep only mode](#sweep-only-mode).  
* Restore: copy objects that were hard-deleted by GC from an external location you used for saving your backup into your repository's storage namespace.

### Using rclone

Follow [rclone documentation](https://rclone.org/docs/) to configure remote access to the underlying storage used by lakeFS.
Replace `LAKEFS_STORAGE_NAMESPACE` with remote:bucket/path which points to the lakeFS repository storage namespace.

> The `BACKUP_STORAGE_LOCATION` attribute points to a location for backing up the objects that will be deleted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `BACKUP_STORAGE_LOCATION` attribute points to a storage location outside your lakeFS storage namespace into which you want to save the backup.
```

```shell
rclone --include "*.txt" cat "<LAKEFS_STORAGE_NAMESPACE>/_lakefs/retention/gc/addresses.text/mark_id=<MARK_ID>/" | \
  rclone -P --no-traverse --files-from - copy <BACKUP_STORAGE_LOCATION> <LAKEFS_STORAGE_NAMESPACE>
```

#### Example

The following of commands used to backup/resource a configured remote 'azure' (Azure blob storage) to access example repository storange namespace `https://lakefs.blob.core.windows.net/repo/example/`:

```shell
# Backup
rclone --include "*.txt" cat "azure://repo/example/_lakefs/retention/gc/addresses.text/mark_id=a64d1885-6202-431f-a0a3-8832e4a5865a/" | \
  rclone -P --no-traverse --files-from - copy azure://repo/example/ azure://backup/repo-example/

# Restore
rclone --include "*.txt" cat "azure://tal/azure-br/_lakefs/retention/gc/addresses.text/mark_id=a64d1885-6202-431f-a0a3-8832e4a5865a/" | \
  rclone -P --no-traverse --files-from - copy azure://backup/repo-example/ azure://repo/example/
```

### Using DistCp

This utility is a Spark application that uses [DistCp](https://hadoop.apache.org/docs/current/hadoop-distcp/DistCp.html) under the hood to copy objects marked by GC as expired from one location to another. 

**Notes**

> * GC backup and restore is available from version 0.5.2 of lakeFS Spark client.

Reviewer 2: I would move 332 here, and add that it holds for lakeFS releases >= v.0.84.0.

* It is compatible with Hadoop API versions 3.1.3 and higher.

> * Note that the utility is not fast due to DistCp performance limitations. You may prefer to backup your whole storage namespace with [AzCopy](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/storage/common/storage-use-azcopy-v10) / [aws cp](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/reference/s3/cp.html) / [rclone](https://rclone.org/).

Reviewer 2: you can link to the rclone integration doc here

1. lakeFS server version must be at least [v0.87.0](https://github.com/treeverse/lakeFS/releases/tag/v0.87.0). 
If your version is lower, you should first upgrade.
2. Read the [limitations](#limitations) section.
3. Use [rclone](https://rclone.org/) for backup and restore

> Running uncommitted GC performed by the following steps:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To run uncommitted GC perform the following steps: 
```

1. Mark the files to deleted - summary and report will be generated under '<repository storage namespace>/_lakefs/retention/gc/uncommitted/<mark id>/'.

>    The mark id sortable time based ID, each run output into a new one.

Reviewer 2: The sentence is not very clear. do you mean that each UGC run generates a new time-based mark id?

   ```bash
   spark-submit \
       --conf spark.hadoop.lakefs.api.url=<LAKEFS_ENDPOINT> \
       --conf spark.hadoop.fs.s3a.access.key=<AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID> \
       --conf spark.hadoop.fs.s3a.secret.key=<AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY> \
       --conf spark.hadoop.lakefs.api.access_key=<LAKEFS_ACCESS_KEY_ID> \
       --conf spark.hadoop.lakefs.api.secret_key=<LAKEFS__SECRET_ACCESS_KEY> \
       --class io.treeverse.gc.UncommittedGarbageCollector \
       --packages org.apache.hadoop:hadoop-aws:2.7.7 \
       lakefs-spark-client-312-hadoop3-assembly-0.6.0.jar \

>        <REPO_NAME> <REPO>

Reviewer 2: what doe <REPO> stand for?

   ```

> 2. Backup (recommended) - can be done after examine the above content. Backup will copy the objects marked to be deleted for run ID to a specified location.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Backup (optional but recommended) - when you start using the feature you may want to first gain confidence in the decisions uncommitted GC makes. Backup will copy the objects marked to be deleted for run ID to a specified location.
```

>    Follow [rclone documentation](https://rclone.org/docs/) to configure remote access to lakeFS storage and the backup location.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Follow [rclone documentation](https://rclone.org/docs/) to configure remote access to lakeFS storage and the backup location and run - 
```

   ```shell
   rclone --include "*.txt" cat "remote:<lakefs storage namespace>/_lakefs/retention/gc/uncommitted/<mark id>/deleted.text/" | \
     rclone -P --no-traverse --files-from - copy <lakefs storage namespace> <backup storage location>
   ```

4. Sweep - delete reported objects to delete based on mark ID

   ```bash
   spark-submit \

>        --conf spark.hadoop.lakefs.gc.mark_id=true \

Reviewer 2: mark_id=true  ? what does this mean?

       --conf spark.hadoop.lakefs.gc.do_sweep=true \
       --conf spark.hadoop.lakefs.api.url=<LAKEFS_ENDPOINT> \
       --conf spark.hadoop.fs.s3a.access.key=<AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID> \
       --conf spark.hadoop.fs.s3a.secret.key=<AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY> \
       --conf spark.hadoop.lakefs.api.access_key=<LAKEFS_ACCESS_KEY_ID> \
       --conf spark.hadoop.lakefs.api.secret_key=<LAKEFS__SECRET_ACCESS_KEY> \
       --class io.treeverse.gc.UncommittedGarbageCollector \
       --packages org.apache.hadoop:hadoop-aws:2.7.7 \
       lakefs-spark-client-312-hadoop3-assembly-0.6.0.jar \
       <REPO_NAME> <REGION>
   ```

>    In case we would like to always run the uncommitted GC without backup, passing `--conf spark.hadoop.lakefs.gc.do_sweep=true` to theprevious command will perform both steps.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   In case we would like to always run the uncommitted GC without backup, passing `--conf spark.hadoop.lakefs.gc.do_sweep=true` to the previous command will perform both steps.
```
